Starlink Capacity Analysis v0.2
Sascha Meinrath1 Karl Grindal2 Glenn Fishbine3 Nancy DeGidio3
July 18, 2025
Abstract
Assuming no topographical considerations or pre-existing user base, in areas where
there are more than 6.66 households per square mile within a Starlink beam’s coverage
area, Starlink may fail to deliver the minimum service level (100/20Mbps) to qualify
as a broadband service, thus failing to meet the NTIA eligibility requirements to re-
ceive federal support for broadband through programs such as the Broadband Equity,
Access, and Deployment (BEAD) program.
Keywords: Starlink; Broadband Requirements; Network Oversubscription, Network Capac-
ity, Beam Coverage
1 Introduction
This analysis provides an initial estimate and evaluation of the capacities and saturation
limits of the Starlink satellite infrastructure. As an exploratory analysis, the goal is to pro-
vide general heuristics that relate to Starlink implementation to meet Federal requirements
for “broadband” (i.e., sub-100ms latency connectivity of at least 100Mbps download speed
and 20Mbps upload speed).
It should be noted preliminary that full technical specifications for Starlink are not pub-
licly available and the assumptions utilized to produce this analysis are explicitly condi-
tional as stated. Overall, these analyses underscore the need for comprehensive capacity
analyses prior to allocation of Federal funding for satellite connectivity and that a failure
to take into account fundamental real-world limits to Starlink capacity will result in the
allocation of Federal funding to support connectivity that may not meet the eligibility re-
quirements to receive Federal funding, thus raising serious concerns over waste, fraud,
and abuse.
1.1 Disclaimer
The analyses presented below are based, in part, on public information available through
June 2025, and which may not accurately represent the full technical capabilities of Starlink
satellites. Because Starlink does not publish thorough and detailed technical specifications
for their satellites, the assumptions made in these analyses may be incorrect; however, ci-
tations to source materials, whenever available (e.g., Starlink FCC filings), are provided.
1Director, X-Lab, Palmer Chair in Telecommunications, Penn State University
2Department of Security Studies, University of New Hampshire
3Breaking Point Solutions, LLC
1
The overarching goal of these analyses are to make transparent the need for independent
verification of capacity limits to the Starlink infrastructure, and the crucial need for de-
tailed engineering, propagation, and capacity analysis to be conducted for any area where
Starlink and other satellite broadband solutions are proposed (for example, as recipients
of BEAD program funding).
Given the documented capacity limitations to satellite broadband service provisioning
(and that these limits are driven both by new and pre-existing customer bases), formal
capacity assessments require data concerning Starlink’s existing user base; and, new user
base limits must be independently verified prior to funding allocations to avoid harmful
network congestion that could degrade services to Starlink users within an over-subscribed
geographic area.
2 Analytical Appraoch
2.1 Satellite Characteristics
This analysis assumes the use of Starlink V2 satellites, which are, as of June 2025, the most
sophisticated generation of widely-deployed Starlink satellites. However, three major it-
erations exist among the estimated 7,850 currently operational satellites: V1, V1.5, and
V2. The current total number of V2 satellites is unknown; but since this analysis assumes
that all operational satellites are V2 vintage, the estimates are a likely maximum capacity
ceiling for the existing Starlink system.
Each V2 satellite offers approximately 96 Gbps of download bandwidth and 6.7 Gbps
upload capacity (a roughly 14:1 ratio of download to upload capacity). Each satellite has
beamforming capabilities to support up to 16 beams, with each beam capable of providing
approximately 6 Gbps download throughput and 0.4 Gbps upload throughput.
2.2 Beam Coverage Area
Each beam has an estimated coverage area of approximately 63 square miles assuming a
1.5-degree beamwidth, as reported in Starlink’s FCC filings. While multiple orbital shells
exist for Starlink Low Earth Orbit (LEO) and Very Low Earth Orbit (VLEO) constellations,
to simplify the analysis, we assume Ka/Ku-band, phased-array transceivers operating at
550 km altitude.
The Estimated Beam Coverage Area also utilizes the following estimates and formula
to develop a circular/oval footprint at nadir, and we provide the formulas used to facilitate
analyses predicated upon different parameters):
Estimated Beam Coverage Area = π ∗ (tan(1/2 ∗ θ ∗ π/180) ∗ h)2
Where:
• h = satellite altitude [we assume 550 km].
2
• θ = beamwidth [we assume a 1.5 degree angular beam width].
• We assume a satellite operating at a right angle to a flat plane to estimate coverage
area.
Estimated Beam Coverage Area = π ∗ (tan(1/2 ∗ 1.5 ∗ π/180) ∗ 550km)2
Assumption 1: Beamwidth Assumption
• We assume a beamwidth of 1.5 degrees, which is typical for Ka/Ku-band phased-
array systems used in LEO constellations like Starlink. This is a reasonable midpoint
between 1° (narrower, high-gain beams) and 2° (wider, lower-gain beams).
• This yields a half-angle for the beam of 0.75 degrees (0.013091 radians).
Assumption 2: Altitude
• We assume an altitude of 550 km. NOTE: While 550 km was the initial planned orbit
height for Starlink’s constellations in their 2019 FCC filings, shells as low as 340 km
above the earth have subsequently been deployed.
Assumption 3: Footprint Area
• Assumptions 1 & 2 yields a circular footprint [i..e., assuming a 90 degree beam on a
flat plane] of 162.8554 square kilometers (roughly 63 square miles)
Additional Known & Excluded Adjustments for Real-World Factors
• Off-Nadir Beams: Beams directed away from nadir create elliptical footprints, which
can increase the coverage area but reduce signal strength and throughput due to slant
range. For a beam steered at, say, 30° from nadir, the footprint becomes elliptical,
potentially covering 200–300 km², depending on the angle.
• Overlap and Cell Size: Starlink’s network design uses overlapping beams to ensure
continuous coverage. Each beam’s effective service area (or “cell”) is likely smaller,
around 100–150 km², to manage capacity and avoid interference. Engineering dis-
cussions and analyses suggest Starlink operationalizes cells using a hexagonal grid,
with effective diameters of roughly 15 km. However, the actual beam footprint is
likely smaller, with cells dynamically assigned to optimize capacity.
• Topology: Topography creates perturbations to the coverage ovals, while hills and
mountains (and trees, buildings, etc.) cause “shadows” whereby coverage within a
satellite’s beam coverage oval can become disrupted.
• Self-Interference, Weather Attenuation, Harmful Interference, etc.: These real-world
constraints all detrimentally affect wireless systems though, for simplicity’s sake, are
excluded from these analyses. All would further lower expected throughput/network
capacity.
3
2.3 Oversubscription Limits
For a given beam within that footprint, we have two distinct cases to consider:
• USE CASE 1: A dedicated bandwidth use case where all Broadband-Serviceable Lo-
cations (BSLs) are simultaneously provided an allocated maximum amount; and,
• USE CASE 2: A more industry-standard, contention ratio use case where the over-
subscription rate is 20:1 (i.e., meaning only 1 in 20 BSLs is actually using Satellite
capacity at any given point in time).
For the analyses below, 6 Gbps is the beam download capacity, 0.419 Gbps is the beam
upload capacity (and 0.1Gbps is the 100 Mbps Federal requirement for broadband down-
load speed, and 0.02 Gbps is federal requirement to meet baseline broadband upload
speed). Given federal minimum speed requirements to qualify as a “broadband” service,
these two use cases would yield two distinct saturation points for the download and up-
load capacities of the Starlink network:
Per Beam BSL Limit (Download Speed):
• USE CASE 1: If all BSLs are simultaneously downloading, then the maximum # of
BSLs per beam is 6 Gbps/0.1 Gbps, or 60 BSLs.
• USE CASE 2: If only 1 in 20 BSLs are downloading at any given time, then each beam
could serve 60 X 20, or 1,200 BSLs.
Per Beam BSL Limit (Upload Speed):
• USE CASE 1: If all BSLs are uploading simultaneously, then the maximum # of BSLs
per beam is 0.419 Gbps / 0.02Gbps, or roughly 21 BSLs.
• USE CASE 2: If only 1 in 20 BSLs are uploading at any given time, then each beam
could serve 20.95 X 20, or 419 BSLs.
A contention ratio of 20:1 is within industry standards, and because the limiting factor
for meeting Federal minimum speed requirement to qualify as a “broadband” connection
is the upload capacity limit, we use the upload-capacity BSL-limit for subsequent analysis.
3 Findings
Given the upload capacity limit of Use Case 2 (with a maximum of 419 BSLs per beam)
and the above assumptions leading to a beam coverage area of 62.9 square miles area, one
can derive the following maximum average Broadband Service Location (BSL) density:
# of BSLs / Beam Coverage Area = Maximum BSLs per Square Mile
Where:
4
• # of BSLs = Maximum Number of BSLs that would saturate the throughput of each
satellite beam [we assume 419 based upon the uplink BSL limit above].
• Beam Coverage Area = 62.9 square miles, as per the above analysis.
419/62.9 = 6.66 BSLs per square mile
Meaning, that a BSL density of more than 6.66 BSLs per square mile within any given
starlink beam coverage area would saturate the network to the point that Starlink could be
unable to provide the minimal upload speed threshold to meet the definition of a “broad-
band” service. Exceeding this 6.66 BSLs per square mile threshold would yield a likely
outcome where Starlink services would consistently fail to meet the NTIA’s minimal per-
formance requirements to receive Federal grant funding from initiatives such as the BEAD
Program.
3.1 A Note on Beam Overlap
Starlink’s design permits multiple beams to partially or totally overlap each other. And
both a tighter beam coverage angle (creating a smaller beam coverage area) and/or polar-
ized overlapping beams could increase the maximum permissible density. However, even
with two overlapping 1 degree beams and no self-interference, one would anticipate over-
subscription to occur with roughly 30 BSLs per square mile, which would still make large
swaths of rural America untenable for Starlink broadband service. Under real world con-
ditions, the risk of network congestion, hidden nodes, and self-interference would likely
put a strain on the Starlink infrastructure before reaching this density level. However,
there is inadequate public data documenting Starlink’s congestion and self-interference
thresholds to include such impact in this analysis.
3.2 Real World Observations
Currently available data indicate that, as of June 2025, only 17% of U.S. speedtest users
with Starlink met the 100 Mbps down, 20 Mbps up speed requirement, according to the
following:
• “Starlink’s U.S. Performance is on the Rise, Making it a Viable Broadband Option
in Some States” (June 10, 2024) https://www.ookla.com/articles/starlink
-us-performance-2025
• “Starlink Shows Gains in Speed Test Report” Telecompetitor Article (June
11, 2025) https://www.telecompetitor.com/starlink-shows-gains-in
-speed-test-report/
These longitudinal data suggest persistent challenges with the satellite coverage span-
ning years. Our analysis on BSL congestion levels also excludes a range of other limiting
5
factors worthy of further documentation (and that would further lower the density thresh-
old), including weather attenuation, hand-off latency spikes (and micro-outages), potential
congestion of ground terminal uplink bands, and others.
Furthermore, preliminary findings by Meinrath and Karl document additional reliabil-
ity concerns, including diurnal Starlink network congestion (of both upload and download
throughput) across the country and across a longitudinal data collection window spanning
from 2022 to 2025. These longitudinal data suggest persistent challenges with the satellite
coverage spanning years, with data documenting consistent periodic latency spikes above
100ms and severe speed degradation during peak broadband usage hours – mirroring
Ookla’s 100+ms latency measurements of the Starlink network.
4 National Implications
Under the NTIA’s latest Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO), State Broadband Offices
are required to be technology independent. Further, they are required to take the lowest
qualified bid and only consider secondary factors if the next highest bid is within 15% of
the lowest bid.
Many State Offices are concerned that Starlink proposals may be the lowest bid and
alternative proposals may not be within the 15% window for consideration.
What this analysis presents is that across many geographic areas Starlink may not be a
qualified bidder as it may be unable to attain the required 100/20 Mbps service level (and,
in deploying Starlink services, may actually degrade pre-existing users’ services to the
point that they no longer receive minimal broadband speeds). Even in lower population
density regions, whenever the number of un- and underserved BSLs subscribing to the
service is greater than 6 households per square mile within a beam’s coverage area, further
due diligence is essential prior to funding allocations.
5 Contact Information
Sascha Meinrath
Director, X-Lab
Palmer Chair in Telecommunications
Penn State University
sascha@thexlab.org
6
